## Common Data formatting issues

### Missing required fields

If you are a _node manager_ and one of the datasets in your IPT is missing data, you should prepare a brief report to contact the data provider and outline what is missing. [Get in contact with original data provider](citing.html) if possible. If it is not possible to contact the original data provider (frequently the case for historical datasets), do your best to follow the guidelines below to fill in data. However, **do not guess or make assumptions** if you are unsure. For all fields inferred, please record notes in the `eventRemarks`, `occurrenceRemarks`, or ‘identificationRemarks` field, as applicable.

If you are a _data provider_ and notice or been notified that you are missing one (or more) of the eight required terms for OBIS, please proceed accordingly for each term.

To resolve missing fields [marked as required](checklist.html) by OBIS, there are several things you can do, depending on which required field is missing. Follow the guidelines below for each term.

* **`occurrenceID`** or **`eventID`**

[Create a unique occurrenceID](identifiers.html) for each of your observations. These IDs can be generated by combining dates, location names, and sampling methods.

* **`eventDate`**

Ensure your eventDate is specified for each event, formatted according to [ISO 8601 standards](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) (e.g., YYYY-MM-DD). We have developed [step by step guidelines](#temporal-dates-and-times) to help you format contemporary dates and durations into ISO formatting. If your date falls outside the range of acceptable dates - i.e., historical or geological data occurring before 1583 - please follow recommendations for [historical data](#historical-data). 

For any eventDate that is inferred from literature, you should document the original date in the `verbatimEventDate` field.


* **`decimalLongitude`** and **`decimalLatitude`**

First, if you have coordinate data, make sure they are [converted into decimal degrees](#converting-coordinates). If you do not have specific coordinate data then you must approximate the coordinates based on locality name. You can use the [Marine Regions gazetteer](https://www.marineregions.org/gazetteer.php?p=search) to search for your region of interest and obtain midpoint coordinates. Guidelines for using this tool and for dealing with uncertain geolocations can be found [here](#geographical-formats). You will have to make some comments in the `georeferenceRemarks` field if you are estimating coordinates.


* **`scientificName`**

This field should contain only the **originally documented** scientific name down to the lowest possible taxon rank, even if there are misspellings or if it is a current synonym. Class, or even Kingdom levels are accepted if more specific taxonomic levels are unknown. Comments about misspellings, etc. can be documented in the `taxonRemarks` field.

You may encounter challenges filling this field if the species name is based on description or if its taxonomy was uncertain at time of sampling. For such uncertain taxonomy situations, see our guidelines [here](common_qc#uncertain-taxaonomic-information.html).

* **`scientificNameID`**

If you cannot obtain the required Life Science Identifier (LSID) from [taxon matching with WoRMS](name_matching.html) then you must contact World Register Marine Species to have an LSID created for your taxon. You will need to confirm that the species is marine. OBIS does not parse LSIDs from other sources (e.g., [Integrated Taxonomic Information System](https://www.itis.gov), [Catalog of Life](https://www.catalogueoflife.org)), but if you want to include WoRMS and other LSIDs, they must be specified in a predictable format.


* **`occurrenceStatus`**

Because occurrenceStatus is a binary field, “presence” or “absence”, this field can usually be easily inferred by data. If there are associated measurements or a record of an observation, the taxon in question would be present. If a particular species is present in one sample, but missing from another, then you could identify that species as absent from the second sample.


* **`basisOfRecord`**

`basisOfRecord` distinguishes what type of record is in your data. For records pertaining to a collected or stored specimen, you must choose one of the following terms:

`PreservedSpecimen`
`FossilSpecimen`
`LivingSpecimen`

For records pertaining to an observation in the wild, you should use:

`HumanObservation` (e.g., observation in the wild)
`MachineObservation` (e.g., photograph, DNA sequences)

For records pertaining to literature data, `basisOfRecord` should always reflect the evidence upon which the Occurrence record was based. For example, a researcher's record based on photographs should specify `MachineObservation`, otherwise specifications should be `HumanObservation` (see [relevant GitHub discussion](https://github.com/tdwg/dwc-qa/issues/134#issuecomment-491827863)).

For specifics on when to use each of these and which other fields should be populated along with them, see the guidelines on [record-level terms](darwin_core#record-level-terms.html).


### Temporal: Dates and times

#### Historical data

### Spatial

#### Converting Coordinates

#### Geographical formats